---
layout: post
title: The Benefits of Static Sites
date: 2020-02-15
author: Jason Schlesinger
categories: development, jekyll
---
I just want to take a moment to sing the praises of static websites.  

I've been "meaning" to build a personal page for nigh on a decade, and every time the hassle of
maintaining servers and hosting platforms has put me off. 

I don't need a content management system to deliver content, files do that just fine. What I needed
was something that could take my content and organize it nicely for delivery. What I needed was a
static website.

## What's a static website? 

A static website refers to the fact that the content on the server doesn't change. You're just
looking at a bunch of files. This really simplifies the hosting aspect, rather than needing fancy
code and databases which need to handle every request, the website is just a series of files which
are hosted.

This is more or less how the Internet worked back in the day, but dynamically hosted content meant
pages could be more responsive and host different content depending on the user and the context in
which they were hosted.

The problem is, if your website hosts the same thing to everyone, and doesn't need context sensitive
content, you don't need the overhead of running a dynamic website. The issue with that is, dynamic
websites made templating and quality of life improvements for the people making the content. It used
to be if you wanted to update a link, you'd have to go through every file and update it by hand.
Nobody wanted to go back to that.

So, we have the modern static website: content is stored in a format which is easy to template
against, and then once the website is updated, software generates the static files once.

## Uh, Cool? 

It **is** cool! Hosting static files is incredibly inexpensive. Static sites don't run code, so
they can't be used maliciously by hackers. Templating engines make setting up static sites easy, and
there are plenty of add-ons to make your site your own.

Additionally, you can integrate generation of a static site into a CI/CD pipeline to build a news
site, blog, or informational page that can be managed by an entire office, club, or lab using code
repository tools. Reviewing changes, introducing edits, collaborating and communicating using these
tools are all operations used by programmers all the time. Extending that to posts on a page is a
natural evolution.

## Static Website Engines

There are a lot of options to choose from, [staticgen.com/](https://www.staticgen.com/) keeps a
running talley of the most popular ones. Check out a popular one that looks like it would be easy to
integrate into your life. I've tried Hugo and it was okay, but I didn't like the effort it took to
build, test, and organize my site. Jekyll is the generator used by Github Sites, so it's what I'm
using now. I wasn't too familiar with Ruby or Go before I started, and unless you plan on developing
for the engine itself, platform and language won't impact your experience that much.

All the best ones are free, and try a few out and see what sticks. Just, don't make the mistake I
did and sit on pushing out your site because you didn't gel with the platform. Fail faster and move
on.

## What Now?

Go build yourself a static website. If you have a Github account, you can start playing with Jekyll
by just uploading a few .md files. It's probably the second fastest way to get your content online
in a personal space.

